######
page: 0
######

viii PREFACE

These include: Dr J. M. R. Graham of Imperial College, London; Dr
Martin Greenhow of Brunel University, London; Professor Makoto
Ohkusu of Kyushu University; Professor Paul Sclavounos of MIT;
Professor Finn Gunnar Nielsen of Norsk Hydro; Professor Enok Palm of
University of Oslo; Dr John Grue of University of Oslo, Dr Bjorn
Sortland of Marintek; Siv.ing. Terje Nedrelid of Marintek, Professor
Bjornar Pettersen of NTH and Professor Dag Myrhaug of NTH.
Graduate students who have been particularly helpful have been Seung Il
Ahn, Rong Zhao, Geir Leland, Jan Kvalsvold, Knut Streitlien and Jens
Bloch Helmers. Rong Zhao has done the calculations presented in
several of the figures and Vigdis O. Dahl is responsible for the skilful
drawing of many of the figures. Marianne Kjolaas has typed the many
versions of the manuscript in an accurate and efficient way.

rt INTRODUCTION

Knowledge about wave induced loads and motions of ships and offshore
structures is important both in design and operational studies. The
significant wave height (the mean of the highest one-third of the waves)
can be larger than 2 m for 60% of the time in hostile areas like the North
Sea. Wave heights higher than 30m can occur. The mean wave period
can be from 15 to 20s in extreme weather situations and it is seldom
below 4s, Environmental loads due to current and wind are also
important. Extreme wind velocities of 40 to 45 ms~' have to be used in
the design of offshore structures in the North Sea.

Fig. 1.1 shows five examples of offshore structures. Two of them, the
jacket type and the gravity platform, penetrate the sea floor. At present,
fixed structures have been built for water depths up to about 300 m. Two
of the structures, the semi-submersible and the floating production ship,
are free-floating. The tension leg platform (TLP) is restrained from
oscillating vertically by tethers, which are vertical anchorlines that are
tensioned by the platform buoyancy being larger than the platform
weight. Both the ship and the semi-submersible are kept in position by a
spread mooring system. An alternative would be to use thrusters and a
dynamic positioning system. Pipes (risers) are used as connections
between equipment on the sea floor and the platform.

Ships serve a large variety of purposes. Examples are transportation of
goods and passengers, naval operations, drilling, marine operations,
fishing, sport and leisure activities. Fig. 1.2 shows three types of ships: a
monohull, a SWATH and a SES. The monohull is exemplified by a
LNG (liquid natural gas) carrier with spherical tanks. SWATH stands
for small-waterplane-area, twin-hull ship and consists of two fully-
submerged hulls that are connected to the above water structure by one
or several thin struts. Between the hulls there may be fitted fins or foils
as in Fig. 1.2. SES (surface effect ship) is an air-cushion supported

’ high-speed vehicle where the air-cushion is enclosed on the sides by

rigid sidewalls.and on the bow and stern by compliant seals. By high
speed we mean high Froude number (Fn). This is defined as Fn =
U/(Lg)i(U = ship speed, L = ship length, g = acceleration of gravity). A
ship is considered a high-speed marine vehicle when Fn > ~0.5. From a

######
page: 1
######

INTRODUCTION

Fig. 1.1. Five types of offshore structures. From left to right we have, jacket,
gravity platform, semi-submersible, floating production ship,
tension leg platform (TLP). (Partly based on a figure provided by
Veritec A/S.)

LNG CARRIER

Sidewall

——
[A Q aN
Cushion > Bow seal
p et deck

Stern seal Rudder or

ventral fin
SES

Fig. 1.2. Three types of ships. SWATH (small-waterplane area, twin-hull
ship), LNG (liquid natural gas) carrier, SES (surface effect ship).

DEFINITIONS OF MOTIONS 3

hydrodynamical view point one can distinguish between ships at zero,
normal and high speed. SWATH concepts have been designed for both
normal and high-speed applications.

Most of the applications presented in the main text will deal with ships
at zero or normal speed and with offshore structures. Applications to
high-speed marine vehicles will be given by exercises. We will discuss
both wave-induced loads and motions, with motions being the result of
integrated hydrodynamic loads on the structure. In the introduction we
will give a survey of important wave load and seakeeping problems for
ships and offshore structures. Before doing that we need to define the
motions. -

DEFINITIONS OF MOTIONS

Motions of floating structures can be divided’ into. wave-frequency
motion, high-frequency motion, slow-drift motion and mean drift. The
oscillatory rigid-body translatory motions are referred to as surge, sway
and heave, with heave being the vertical motion (see Fig. 1.3). The
oscillatory angular motions are referred to as roll, pitch and yaw, with
yaw being rotation about a vertical axis. For a ship, surge is the
longitudinal motion and roll is the angular motion about the longitudinal
axis.

The wave-frequency motion is mainly linearly-excited motion in the
wave-frequency range of significant wave energy. High-frequency mo-

Fig. 1.3. Definition of rigid-body motion modes. Exemplified for a deep
concrete floater.

######
page: 2
######

Table 1.1. Resonant heave oscillations of ships, offshore structures and high speed vehicles

y
g
>

SWATH (small

waterplane area twin

Monohull ship
Catamaran

4-16 s7

TLP (tension leg

SES (surface effect

hull ship)

>20s

Semi-submersible

>20s

platform)
2-48

ship)
<Is

Natural heave period:
Restoring force:

Elasticity of tethers ‘Waterplane area ‘Waterplane area ‘Waterplane area

Non-linear sum.

Air compressibility
Linear wave forces

Linear wave forces due
to low encounter
frequency between
ship and waves

Linear wave forces Swell (long waves)

frequency wave

forces

due to high

encounter

frequency between

ship and waves
‘Ride Control”

Dominating excitation
mechanism around the
natural heave period:

Foil control

Wave radiation Viscous effects

Viscous effects

Important damping:

# Rough estimate: V(L/1.5), where L is ship length in metres.

TRADITIONAL SHIP PROBLEMS

tion is significant for TLPs and is often referred to as ‘rins
‘springing’ and is due to resonance oscillations in heave, pitch ai.

the platform. The restoring forces for the TLP are due to tethers ana
mass forces due to the platform. The natural periods of these motion
modes are typically 2-4 which are less than most wave periods. They
are excited by non-linear wave effects. ‘Ringing’ is associated with
transient effects and ‘springing’ is steady-state oscillations.

Similar non-linear effects cause slow drift and mean motions in waves
and current. Wind will also induce slow drift and mean motion. Slow
drift motion arises from resonance oscillations. For a moored structure it
occurs in surge, sway and yaw. The restoring forces are due to the
mooring system and the mass forces due to the structure. Typical
resonance periods are of the order of 1 to 2 minutes for conventionally
moored systems.

Heave is an important response variable for many structures. Table
1.1 illustrates the range of the natural heave periods of different types of
marine structures. These include SES, TLPs, monohull ships, catamar-
ans, SWATH ships and semi-submersibles. The table indicates how the
natural heave oscillations can be excited. For instance for the SES-hull it
occurs due to high encounter frequency between the ship and the waves,
while for the SWATH it occurs due to low encounter frequency between
the ship and the waves. The table also shows what types of restoring
forces can cause heave resonance. For the SES it is the compressibility
effect of the air in the cushion. For the monohull ship, catamaran,
SWATH and semi-submersible it is due to change in buoyancy forces.
This is related directly to the waterplane area of the vessels. Finally we
see in Table 1.1 either the most important physical source of natural
heave damping or how one artificially increases the damping by control
systems. .

For the SES it is the heave accelerations and not the heave motions
that are important. If no ‘ride control’ is used, acceleration values of 1.5g
can occur in relatively calm sea. If the natural heave period is 0.5s, it
means the heave amplitude is ~0.1 m.

A semi-submersible is designed to avoid resonance heave motion and
the maximum heave motion in severe sea states will be less than half the
maximum wave amplitude.

TRADITIONAL SHIP PROBLEMS
Examples of important seakeeping and wave load problems for ships are
illustrated in Fig. 1.4. In particular, vertical accelerations and relative
vertical motions between the ship and the waves are important responses.
Accelerations determine loads on cargo and equipment and are an
important reason for seasickness. The relative vertical motions can be
used to evaluate the possibility and damage due to slamming and water

######
page: 3
######

Bonjour test dans la page 1

######
page: 4
######

Une autre page avec un autre mot : maison

######
page: 5
######

Et une troisiéme encore avec un autre mot chien

